.\" Copyright 2019 Red Hat Inc.
.\" Tue 2019-Aug 20 Ben Woodard <woodard@redhat.com>
.\"                 Florian Wiemer <fwiemer@redhat.com>
.\"                 Mark Wielaard <mjw@redhat.com>
.\" Contact elfutils-devel@sourceware.org to correct errors or typos.
.TH EU-ELFCLASSIFY 1 "2019-Aug-20" "elfutils" 
.SH "NAME"
eu-elfclassify \- Determine the type of an ELF file.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"
eu-elfclassify [\fB\-\-core\fR]
        [\fB\-\-debug-only\fR]
        [\fB\-\-elf\fR]
        [\fB\-\-elf\-archive\fR]
        [\fB\-\-elf\-file\fR]
        [\fB\-\-executable\fR]
        [\fB\-\-library\fR]
        [\fB\-\-linux\-kernel\-module\fR]
        [\fB\-\-loadable\fR]
        [\fB\-\-program\fR]
        [\fB\-\-shared\fR]
        [\fB\-\-unstripped\fR]
        [\fB\-f\fR|\fB \-\-file\fR]
        [\fB\-\-no\-stdin\fR]
        [\fB\-\-stdin\fR]
        [\fB\-\-stdin0\fR]
        [\fB\-z\fR|\fB \-\-compressed\fR]
        [\fB\-\-matching\fR]
        [\fB\-\-no\-print\fR]
        [\fB\-\-not\-matching\fR]
        [\fB\-\-print\fR]
        [\fB\-\-print0\fR]
        [\fB\-q\fR|\fB \-\-quiet\fR]
        [\fB\-v\fR|\fB \-\-verbose\fR]
        [\fB\-?\fR|\fB \-\-help\fR]
        [\fB\-\-usage\fR]
        [\fB\-V\fR|\fB \-\-version\fR]
	\fIelffile\fR...
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"
\&\fBeu-elfclassify\fR identifies the primary purpose of a particular kind of
 \s-1ELF\s0 file or files
.SH "OPTIONS"
.IX Header "OPTIONS"
The long and short forms of options, shown here as alternatives, are
equivalent. All of the classification options must apply at the same time to a
particular file.  Classification options can be negated using a
\fB\-\-not\-\fR  prefix.
.SS "Classification Options"
.IX Subsection "Classification Options"
.IP "\fB\-\-core\fR" 4
.IX Item "--core"
.PD
File is an ELF core dump file.
.IP "\FB\-\-debug\-only\fR" 4
.IX Item "--debug-only"
.PD
File is a debug only ELF file (separate .debug, .dwo or dwz multi-file).
.IP "\fB\-\-elf\fR" 4
.IX Item "--elf"
.PD
File looks like an ELF object or archive/static library (default).
.IP "\fB\-\-elf\-archive\fR" 4
.IX Item "--elf-archive"
.PD
File is an ELF archive or static library.
.IP "\fB\-\-elf\-file\fR" 4
.IX Item "--elf-file"
.PD
File is an regular ELF object (not an archive/static library).
.IP "\fB\-\-executable\fR" 4
.IX Item "--executable"
.PD
File is (primarily) an ELF program executable (not primarily a DS.O)
.IP "\fB\-\-library\fR" 4
.IX Item "--library"
.PD
File is an ELF shared object (DSO) (might also be an executable).
.IP "\fB\-\-linux\-kernel\-module\fR" 4
.IX Item "--linux-kernel-module"
.PD
File is a linux kernel module.
.IP "\fB\-\-loadable\fR" 4
.IX Item "--loadable"
.PD
File is a loadable ELF object (program or shared object).
.IP "\fB\--program\fR" 4
.IX Item "--program"
.PD
File is an ELF program executable (might also be a DSO).
.IP "\fB\-\-shared\fR" 4
.IX Item "--shared"
.PD
File is (primarily) an ELF shared object (DSO) (not primarily an executable).
.IP "\fB\-\-unstripped\fR" 4
.IX Item "--unstripped"
.PD
File is an ELF file with symbol table or .debug_* sections and can be stripped
further.
.SS "Input flags"
.IX Subsection "Input flags"
.IP "\fB\-f\fR" 4
.IX Item "-f"
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-file\fR" 4
.IX Item "--file"
.PD
Only classify regular (not symlink nor special device) files.
.IP "\fB\-\-no\-stdin\fR" 4
.IX Item "--no-stdin"
.PD
Do not read files from standard input (default).
.IP "\fB\-\-stdin\fR" 4
.IX Item "--stdin"
.PD
Also read file names to process from standard input, separated by newlines.
.IP "\fB\-\-stdin0\fR" 4
.IX Item "--stdin0"
.PD
Also read file names to process from standard input, separated by ASCII NUL
bytes.
.IP "\fB\-z\fR" 4
.IX Item "-z"
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-compressed\fR" 4
.IX Item "--compressed"
.PD
Try to open compressed files or embedded (kernel) ELF images.
.SS "Output flags"
.IX Subsection "Output flags"
.IP "\fB\-\-matching\fR" 4
.IX Item "--matching"
.PD
If printing file names, print matching files (default).
.IP "\fB\-\-no\-print\fR" 4
.IX Item "--no-print"
.PD
Do not output file names.
.IP "\fB\-\-not\-matching\fR" 4
.IX Item "--not-matching"
.PD
If printing file names, print files that do not match.
.IP "\fB\-\-print\fR" 4
.IX Item "--print"
.PD
Output names of files, separated by newline.
.IP "\fB\-\-print0\fR" 4
.IX Item "--print0"
.PD
Output names of files, separated by ASCII NUL.
.SS " Additional flags"
.IX Subsection " Additional flags"
.IP "\fB\-q\fR" 4
.IX Item "-q,"
.PD
.IP "\fB\-\-quiet\fR" 4
.IX Item "--quiet"
.PD
Suppress some error output (counterpart to --verbose).
.IP "\fB\-v\fR" 4
.IX Item "-v"
.PD
.IP "\fB\-\-verbose\fR" 4
.IX Item "--verbose"
.PD
Output additional information (can be specified multiple times).
.IP "\fB\-?\fR" 4
.IX Item "-?"
.PD
.IP "\fB\-\-help\fR" 4
.IX Item "--help"
.PD
Give this help list.
.IP "\fB\-\-usage\fR" 4
.IX Item "--usage"
.PD
Give a short usage message.
.IP "\fB\-V\fR" 4
.IX Item "-V"
.PD
.IP "\fB\-\-version\fR" 4
.IX Item "--version"
.PD
Print program version.

.SH "AUTHOR"
.IX Header "AUTHOR"
Written by Florian Wiemer.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.IX Header "REPORTING BUGS"
Please reports bugs at https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
.IX Header "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright © 2019 Red Hat Inc.  License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or
later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.  This is free software: you
are free to change and redistribute it.  There is NO WARRANTY, to the
extent permitted by law.
